Okay, well, so we saw that everybody
getting a federal grad-school loan for
2018-19 got the same rate, which was 6.6%.
Remember that was calculated off the
treasury rate, they added just one spread
to that risk-free treasury rate where
that one spread of 3.6% over the treasury
rate is supposed to reflect the average
risk of a grad school borrower, okay?
And we also saw that students
who get into distress
have access to Income-driven repayment.
And this has really,
really taken off in the past few years and
is a big part of why we see
the student loan debt load increase so
much to this gigantic
level that it has hit now.
So, let's think about
the opportunity that this
can present to a lender
entering this space.
Okay, so, think about
the graduates who are doing better.
We've already seen the graduates who have
hit a rough patch access income-driven
payment but those that are doing better,
you've got the job you hoped for
and you expect rightly or
wrongly that this is going to continue,
you're going to have this high paying
job going forward from here and
you'd like, so
now you're a low risk, right?
Previously maybe you could
have been high or low but
you know you're a low risk,
that's how you view yourself.
So, a lender could come along to you and
say, well, okay,
you're paying 6.6% on your loan, well,
that represents an average risk level but
now we can see you're low risk so
we're going to offer you something better,
how about 4%, how about 4%, right?
So from the lender's point of view,
there are now 4 percent, well,
that's higher than 3%, so there's still of
a risk spread from their point of view.
And maybe they view you as being low-risk
enough that they can make money loan to
you at 4%.
And from your point of view,
great, you're paying 6.6,
now you're paying 4, geez, let's do it.
So, this had been, just that,
right there, that's been the main
logic of the business model behind
the biggest player in the space,
which is SoFi, short for
social finance,, SoFi.
And SoFi is not the only player in
this space, you've got common bond,
you've got some other
lenders in this space now.
That was basically the business
model that all these borrowers
are lumped into one pool and
all paying the same rate.
Well, now especially that they
have finished their program,
they've gotten jobs or they haven't,
we can see who the better risks are.
Let's go in there,
let's offer them to refinance them
out of these loans in a better way.
So that's been the basic business model.
Now you have to of course bear in mind
that from the borrower's point of view,
as I've been sort of hinting at here,
there's a bit of a projection,
a bit of a risk, a speculation on your
part when you do refinance into a SoFi
loan because you are giving up your right
to enter income-driven repayment, right?
That's a federal program, it's for
federal student loans, right?
If you're refinancing the SoFi,
then you got to find out, well,
what are they offering me?
If I hit a rock, anyone can hit
a rough patch for whatever reason,
what are they offering
me in that situation?
So that's the trade-off.
Many people felt that,
well, it's worth it,
I like that low interest rate,
I'm going to do that, and
that's been driving the ramping
up of these businesses.
Now let me add, by the way,
that this whole business of refinancing
people out of their student loans
has kind of slowed down recently.
Why would it slow down?
Well, it slowed down
because rates have gone up,
rates have gone up,
just the treasury rates have gone up.
So, I put on the screen here, a Bloomberg,
this is the screenshot from the Bloomberg
terminal, which is sort of the,
for those of you not familiar with this,
this is the go-to financial
information database that people
turn to in the financial markets.
And Bloomberg, yes, it's the same
Bloomberg who was mayor of New York, and
this is how he made that money.
And so I went to that Bloomberg terminal,
I told it to show me
the ten-year treasury rate over
the period going back some years.
Just show me where the rates have gone.
And you see that rates
came way down from 2006,
which is where this graph starts, 2006.
They came way down through the crisis and
stayed down in the year's post-crisis.
But now in recent years they've
come up a little bit and
they've come up a little bit.
So, because they've come up,
the business model of these
Fintech student lenders
has gotten tougher, right?
Because if you took out a student loan,
let's say in 2016 the rates were really
low, then that rate you got was keyed off
of the very low ten-year rate of 2016.
Now, a few years down the road,
rates have gone up.
So, even if you're paying a credit spread,
which is in some sense too high
because you're a low risk, well,
maybe the spread over the treasury rate
is too high, but you got that rate over
a treasury rate, which is really low,
so now everything has come up.
It may be hard for SoFi to offer you
something that's more attractive than
your loan, which was keyed off of
a very low treasury rate back in 2016.
So it's gotten harder for
them to make money this way,
the offer to refinance people
out of their student loans.
So if you look at these issuers,
SoFi and so on,
what you'll notice is,
they're trying to transition away
a little bit from that business
model of focusing on refinance,
to being the lender that loans
to you in the first place.
So that you never even take out
a federal loan in the first place,
you just borrow from SoFi originally,
right?
And of course now they're
making it a little harder on
themselves because they're loaning
to you before you get a job or
don't get a job and
sort of taking a bigger risk.
But i think from their point of view,
well,
this is a way that we can get around this
problem we have, which is that we're so
dependent on what happens to interest
rates in the overall market between
the time you take out your loan and
the time that you might want to refinance,
we don't want to be so beholden to that,
so let's be the original lender.
But of course, as we said,
if they're the original lender,
you're never going to get
income-driven repayment.
And so you're going to have to find it or
what are they going to offer you?
What are they going to offer you to
smooth over the rough patches in your
life going down the road?
So, that's what we're
seeing now in this market,
is it started off with refinancing but
the path of interest rates have kind of,
has made that tougher and
that's encouraged them to go further
upstream to the original origination, and
it remains to be seen how well that goes
for them and how well that works out for
the borrowers who are now sort
of depending on SoFi and so
on to help them through the rough
patches versus the federal plan.
Okay.
So to summarize, lending to all
student borrowers at the same rate
is going to create this opportunity down
the road for refinanced focus lenders
to refinance those people who
turn out to be the better risks.
There is this complication from
the borrowers' point of view that, yeah,
I could do that, maybe it's a good idea,
maybe it's not, I really, it's hard for
me to judge necessarily whether I
would take advantage of income-driven
repayment down the road, and now I'm
giving that up by refinancing at the SoFi.
For some people it's clear they, to them
that they'll never need it to others,
it may be not so clear.
And then the path that interest
rates have taken over the past few
years have shown these lenders that
this is a risky business model.,
it's too driven by the path
the interest rates take, so
why not move further upstream and
be the original lender?
And that's the business
they're getting into now, and
we'll see if they can make that work.
So that's what I want to say
about lending to consumers.
The last point I want to make in the next
module is going to be a business model
that has really taken off recently
where you have market place lending to
small businesses.